---
layout: post
title: "The Emerging Languages Conference"
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

Simply a pointer to an event that's likely of interest to readers of this blog.

If you like programming languages and you care about how they're evolving, set aside July 21st and 22nd of this year. O'Reilly's Brady Forrest and I have put together the first "Emerging Languages Conference":http://emerginglangs.com/, co-located with "OSCON":http://www.oscon.com/oscon2010, which returns to Portland, Oregon this year.

The event is designed to get language designers, researchers, implementors, and enthusiasts in a room for two days to share experiences, successes, disasters, ideas, and hopes for the future. In the morning, folks working on interesting young languages (or language-related tech, like runtimes) will present 30 or 15 minute talks about their projects. In the afternoons, we'll break into to freeform "unconference"-style sessions where attendees can focus on whatever floats their digits: compiler design, type systems, interpreters, source-to-source translation, etc. etc.

It's my hope that this event will connect people who didn't know they had common goals, in the process helping to shape the future of programming languages. I think it's going to be a big deal.

We're going to keep tickets under $200 for attendees, and that price includes an as-yet-undetermined level of access to OSCON (at the very least, you'll get to see the keynotes). If you're giving a talk, the event is free, of course. We're trying to secure sponsorships to fly in folks from faraway lands who are on a tight student/academic budget.

Check out "the blog":http://emerginglangs.com/, "follow the event on Twitter":http://twitter.com/emerginglangs, "join the Google Group":https://groups.google.com/group/emerginglangs, and hold tight for registration information. Hope to see you there!
