---
layout: post
title: "Advising Simperium"
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

I've been impressed with "Simplenote":http://simplenoteapp.com/ since I first installed it. It has everything you want out of a good iOS app: simplicity, reliability, frequent updates, plentiful options for desktop integration, and just enough going on under the hood to keep power users happy. I recommend Simplenote at every opportunity, and I even wrote a "backup utility":https://github.com/al3x/simple-backup that inspired their "official backup solution":http://simplenote-export.appspot.com/.

This past summer, I got to meet Fred and Mike, the guys behind Simplenote. Their company is called "Simperium":http://simperium.com/, and their ambitions run far beyond selling subscriptions to premium features for Simplenote. Indeed, Simplenote is just a demo – albeit an incredibly useful demo – for the sync platform that Simperium is working on.

"Dropbox":http://www.dropbox.com/ is the clear leader in syncing raw bits today. They do a great job at it. The latest version of Simplenote supports syncing to Dropbox because it's so darn useful. That said, Dropbox isn't a solution for the problem of syncing structured documents. You can build that extra sync layer, but isn't easy, particularly if you're a developer who's never built a sync solution before. The beleaguered developers at "Cultured Code":http://culturedcode.com/ know "all too":http://culturedcode.com/things/blog/2010/12/state-of-sync-part-1.html "well":http://culturedcode.com/things/blog/2011/01/state-of-sync-part-ii.html that this is a hard problem. Right now, sync is a problem that's getting solved by developers over and over again in slightly different ways; some better, some worse.

What Simperium will eventually offer is an easy-to-use platform for building apps that sync. I'm happy to announce that I'm now an advisor to and a (very minor) investor in Simperium. I haven't worked on sync systems, but I am hoping that I can provide some insight to the Simperium team on building a developer platform and scaling out their backend systems.

If you're a Simplenote user, expect the app to get better and better. If you're developing an app that needs to sync, Simperium is building a platform you'll want to use. If you rely on apps that sync, you'll be using Simperium-powered tools before you know it. Fred, Mike, and their team are up to great things, and I feel privileged to be able to support them as best I can as they take their company to the next level.

Be sure to check out the "latest release of Simplenote":http://simplenote.squarespace.com/news/2011/2/3/ios-update-sharing-passcode-lock-fixes-and-more.html, which features the aforementioned Dropbox sync capability along with the ability to treat notes as lists, slick sharing and tagging, and more.